=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
                              CHRONO  TRIGGER 
-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-
                    Chrono Trigger Walkthrough and FAQ  
                              (Final Version)
                               By: 'AÃ® Tadeo
                           Created: June 23, 2000
                      Final Release: February 17, 2001
                   Mail me at: c_trigger@edsamail.com.ph
                              ICQ#: 12218741
                              AIM: atadeo020
                     Home Page: http://surf.to/aaronph

        -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
                               WALKTHROUGH
        =-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-



BEGINNING
---------
At the title screen select a new game. Or, if you already finished the game 
select the New Game+ Option (for more information about this, head to the New 
Game+ Information section of this Walkthrough/FAQ). After selecting, you will 
be asked what battle mode you want. Select active if you want challenge. The 
enemies here will not wait for you to finish your move. If you want a more 
strategic battle, select the Wait Battle Mode. This will allow you to make 
your move first before the enemy does. After selecting the Battle Mode. Name 
our Hero. For the sake of the Walkthrough, let's use his default name, Crono.

CRONO'S HOUSE (1000 AD)
-----------------------
Item/s:
   200G

The start of the game will bring you to Crono's room. After Crono wakes up, 
head down the stairs. Crono's Mom will forget your friends' name. For this 
walkthrough, let's use her default name, Lucca. Talk to Crono's Mom again 
before leaving the house for 200G allowance. Exit Crono's House to the World 
Map.

MAYOR'S MANOR (1000 AD)
-----------------------
Item/s:
   100G
   300G
   Tonic

Go southwest a little to one of the houses, and enter the Mayor's Manor. You 
can learn about Weapons and Items, save points, use of shelters, Techniques or 
Techs, and tips about how the battle system works and how to use the buttons 
by speaking to the different people here. Before leaving the manor, take the 
Tonic in a chest in the lower floor and take the money (100G) inside the chest 
on the second floor. Don't forget to talk to the man in the middle TWICE and 
he'll give you 300G. (Thanks to Brandon Boucher for the info) Return to World 
Map.

LEENE'S SQUARE (1000 AD)
------------------------

You may visit the other houses to gain more info or just talk. Then, head to 
the north of Crono's house to Leene's Square.

There are A LOT of things that you can do here in Leene Square. Upon entering, 
you may be wondering why you couldn't talk to a few characters that are 
running around (they are busy racing against each other so they won't bother 
talking to you). There are also stalls here that sell items, equipment, and 
accessories. Also, remember that the currency that Leene Square uses is silver 
points. You can obtain silver points by winning them from the different fun 
mini-games.

First of all, don't talk to anyone yet and head north to the next section of 
Leene Square. Walk up to the girl that is running around Leene's Bell. Upon 
bumping into her, check up on her first then take the pendant. Talk to her and 
let's name her Marle, which is the her default name. Return her pendant and 
let her join you. Upon joining, you can now have fun in Leene Square. Note: 
don't talk to anyone yet.

Here are the mini-games that you may play here at Leene's Square that includes 
the rules and the requirements in playing.

1. Ring the Bell!
     Found in the Southwestern portion of the first section of Leene's 
     Square. Your goal is to time it right that Crono can ring the bell.
     If you win, you'll receive 1 Silver Point. Note that this is the 
     second easiest game here at Leene's Square.

2. Guess the Winner!
     It can be found in the first section of Leene's Square. Talk to the
     person standing in the blue tent, which is to the right of the fountain
     In the middle. He will let you guess who will be the winner in the next
     race. The racers' names are, G.I. Jogger (G.I. Joe), Steel Runner 
     (Armored Knight), Green Ambler (Alien), and Catalack (a Cat!). If you 
     try to talk to him while the race is going on, he will not entertain
     you. Wait for the race to finish before talking to the man. If you win
     the man will give you 20 Silver Points as a prize. It's hard to guess
     who the winner is, right? Notice the old man near the Starting Line?
     He will guess who the winner will be in the next race. He will sometimes
     be wrong but most probably, he will make a correct guess. So, if you're
     tired of guessing, talk to the old geezer BEFORE A RACE for a hint. 

3. Norstein Bekkler's Lab
     Located in the eastern portion of the first section of Leene's Square.
     It is in a large pink tent with a skull at the entrance. This place is 
     pure fun. First, select the amount of silver points you want to bet.
     10, 40, or 80 Silver Points can be placed as bet.

     At 10 Silver Points, you get to play a game where you must find a 
     certain person among the 3. They are Vicks, Wedge, and Piette. They will
     change places fast. To have an advantage, memorize 2 persons only. 
     Example, watch Vicks and Wedge's movement. When the clown asks you where
     Vicks or Wedge, you'll be able to identify the 2. The one whom you
     didn't follow his movement will be Piette. If you win, you'll get a 
     Poyozo Doll to use as decoration for Crono's House. Note that these
     Poyozo Dolls play a major role in the late part of the game. It does not
     necessarily mean that the Poyozo Dolls in Crono's house will play that
     important part, you will eventually encounter more Poyozo Dolls on the
     way. Note also, that the Poyozo Dolls on the second floor of Crono's 
     house will change the music if you examine it. Tip: Pick the Soldier
     that is farthest from the two. Credit goes to Brandon Boucher.

     At 40 Silver Points, you get to play a mimic game. All you have to do     
     is to Mimic or Copy the movement of the clone using the designated
     buttons, L=Left Arm, R=Right Arm, Y=Laugh, A=Surprise. If you managed
     to mimic everything, you'll win a Clone of Crono that you can use also   
     to decorate Crono's House. Take note that this Clone will play a MAJOR
     role in the game. If you think hard you'll know it. 

     At 80 Silver Points, you get to play a Push the monster game. Your goal
     in this game is to prevent your character, who is hanged just above a
     flame, and push the 3 coins to be able to put monsters into the door at
     the back. It's very challenging. You're pushing the coins at the same
     time preventing your character from being fried. If you see a blue light
     Appear at your left side, examine it to raise the rope a bit, then 
     continue pushing those monsters back. If you win, you'll get a cat.
     These cats will be brought to Crono's House. You can win as many cats 
     as you want. When you go to Crono's house, you'll see all the cats 
     you've won roaming around the house.

4. Soda Guzzling Contest
     This is found in the eastern portion of the second section of Leene's
     Square. Your goal is to drink up 8 cans of Soda within a certain time
     limit. Press the A button as fast as you can to drink the cans. Turbo
     enabled controllers have the advantage here. All they have to do is to
     hold the A button, therefore making this game the easiest one. If you
     managed to drink the 8 cans, you'll receive 5 Silver Points.

5. Beat Gato!
     In the second section of Leene's Square, head all the way to the west
     past the old man until you reach Lucca's Demo Robot, Gato. This mini-
     game will train your characters in battle. If you managed to beat Gato,
     which I'm sure you will, you'll receive 10 Experience Points and 15
     Silver Points. All you have to do is to attack! If you lose, play 
     Another game! Just kidding. :)  (Note: If you return here with Ayla, 
     You can charm Gato and receive a Power Meal)

Now, back to the walkthrough. After you've played these mini-games, you can 
visit the Tribal Dance. It is located to the Northeast of the second section 
of Leene's Square. You can push the buttons to make your characters dance, 
laugh, and even surprise them.

Now, there are certain things at Leene's Square that you can do that will 
affect a certain event later in the game. You can do them in any order you 
want, but this is the best way, I think.

1. Go to Melchior (Weapons Merchant and Swordsmith in the first section of 
Leene's Square) who is near a woman. Talk to the woman first then talk to 
Melchior. He'll sell his items to you then he will ask if you could persuade 
Marle into selling her pendant. Say NO! 

2. In the western area of the 2nd section, you'll see and old man walking and 
a pack of lunch/food on a table. Don't ever take it. Just leave it there 
because you might actually be tempted to get it.

3. Head to the Eastern area of the 2nd Section, you'll find a girl who lost 
her cat. Remember a cat near the old man? Examine it and you'll hear a mew. It 
will then follow you wherever you go. Lead it to the girl then talk to the 
girl and she'll be glad to have her cat back.

Back to the main story. Head to the fountain at the center of the 1st section 
of Leene's Square. Talk to the girl sitting there. After talking to her, it 
will be announced that Lucca and her dad finished their invention. Go north to 
the 2nd section. Head north. Upon reaching the stairs to the 3rd section, 
Marle will tell you that she wants to buy some candies. While she is buying 
the candies, don't push a single button. In other words, don't even try to 
move away from her while she is busy buying the candy. This certain event will 
also affect the same event in the later part of the game (the one I talked 
about a while ago regarding those 3 things you need to do). Then, after buying 
the candies head north to the 3rd section. Upon reaching the 3rd section, 
you'll see the introduction of Taban about their invention, the teleportation 
device (wow! I ought to have one!). Upon regaining control of your characters, 
talk to Lucca. You will be asked by her to try out their invention. Step into 
the left pod. All goes well (by the way, you can try and try the device to 
your hearts' content). 

Note: If you are in the New Game+ Mode, you'll notice a shining dot in the 
right pod of Lucca's Device. If you examine it now, you'll fight Lavos right 
away in the hardest level of the game. You have to fight Lavos ALONE. :) 
There's a new ending waiting for you if you do this. Check out Ending #2.

Then talk to Marle. When Marle tries the device something wrong happens. Her 
pendant reacts to the device and a portal or a gate will appear and will suck 
her into it. Upon regaining control of Crono, step into the left pod and take 
the pendant. Crono then decides to follow Marle to find out what happened to 
her. Lucca tells Crono that she will follow them later after she discovers 
what caused this event. Crono will be sucked into the gate and will travel 
through time! Now the real adventure of Crono will begin!

TRUCE CANYON (600 AD)
---------------------
Item/s:
   Tonic
   Power Glove

Upon exiting the gate, you will be greeted by 3 imps. You can easily beat them 
w/ normal attacks. No problem at all. Head northwest to the next section. You 
will meet a batch of 2 Imps. It's easy. There are also items that can be found 
in this area. A Tonic and a Power Glove. When you see imps playing, just pass 
through them quietly. Don't go near them and they'll not attack you. Just head 
south to exit to the World Map. You'll see that the place is different from 
your time, 1000 AD because you're in 600 AD!

GUARDIA KINGDOM (600 AD)
------------------------

You can visit the residents of Truce Village. You can buy equipments/item from 
the Market. You can also see Lucca's ancestors in one of the residences here. 
You can see them forging Leene's Bell (w/c you saw at Leene's Square 1000 AD). 
After talking to the villagers and buying anything you want, head to the 
Guardia Forest just south of the Castle.

NOTE: Don't go to the bridge as you can't pass through here yet. Also, don't 
go to the cathedral yet.

GUARDIA FOREST (600 AD)
-----------------------
Item/s:
   Power Tab
   Shelter

There are also many item's here. At the first intersection, head left. At the 
next intersection, w/c is almost right after the first one, head to the lower 
path. There are two shining dots here. The Northern one contains a Power Tab 
as for the southern one, you'll just invite 2 Roly riders. After getting the 
Power Tab head back to the intersection and take the upper path. Don't mind 
the left path of the first intersection, it will meet with the north path of 
the second intersection. While walking, you'll notice 2 bushes that are 
moving. The one on the right will house a monkey-like monster w/c will give 
you a shelter. You can always exit to the World Map and return here and get 
another shelter from him and as many time as you like. The other moving bush 
has monster in it. So ignore it, or fight it for EXP. Next, continue on until 
you come to another intersection where one path is to the north and the other 
to the east. Head to the north, the east past only contains a sealed chest. 
Exit to the World Map.

GUARDIA CASTLE (600 AD)
-----------------------
Item/s:
   Tonic
   Ether
   100G
   Bronze Mail

Upon entering the castle the guards will stop you when suddenly a familiar 
person will come and lets you pass (it's so obvious who she is). In the throne 
room, talk to King Guardia XXI. He will give you permission to sleep in the 
Knight's Quarters that is to the left of the entrance then go down the stairs 
you'll see. The other path will lead you to the kitchen. After resting, if 
necessary, head to the throne room and take the right path up to the Queen's 
Room. On your way up, you'll see a chest with a Tonic. Upon reaching the Room 
of the Queen, talk to the guard and he will give you access to the room. Take 
the chest with an Ether first then, head to the queen and talk to her. Then, 
Marle will feel something then she will disappear! She ceases to exists!

After Marle disappears, head down to the throne room. On the way, you'll meet 
with Lucca. She will tell you that Marle is actually Princess Nadia of the 
Guardia Kingdom in 1000 AD. And she was mistaken as Queen Leene therefore the 
King stopped the search for the real Queen Leene w/c is actually held captive 
somewhere. Lucca explains that Marle disappeared because Queen Leene will be 
killed by the hostage-takers because they will think that the King has no more 
interest in rescuing the Queen in which the king only mistook Marle for her. 
So Marle do not exist anymore (whaaa!). So your mission now is to look for the 
missing Queen Leene to save both her and Marle. Before leaving the castle, be 
sure to take a rest at the Knight's Quarters. Also, to the left of the throne 
room, there's a set of stairs leading to the Kings room. On the way, you'll 
find a chest with 100G, then you'll see a sealed chest w/c you can't do 
anything right now, and finally a Bronze Mail in the King's room. You may now 
exit to the World Map.

GUARDIA FOREST (600 AD)
-----------------------
Item/s:
   Shelter

There's nothing much here as you have been here already. Just take another 
shelter then head south and exit to the World Map.

CATHEDRAL (600 AD)
------------------
Item/s:
   Revive           Power Tab       Shelter
   3 Tonics         100G            Iron Sword
   Maiden Suit      Speed Belt      Mid-Ether
   2 Ethers         Defender
   Steel Saber      Heal

In the World Map, head west to another forest which fortunately, you can pass 
freely. Enter the Cathedral. Upon entering, it seems like the ordinary church 
with nuns. But observe the statements of those nuns, they're not nun-like at 
all. Speak to them all then examine the shining dot at the altar, which is the 
coral pin of the real Queen Leene. Then, the nuns reveal themselves as Naga-
ettes and will attack your party. After you beat them, another will come in to 
surprise Lucca. A Frog will then come to Lucca's rescue. Go with him and name 
him Frog. After joining, check the organ to open a passageway. Upon entering, 
ignore the door to your north and head left. Get the 2 chests with Revive and 
Tonic. Enter the next door you see then head up the stairs and enter the room 
right after the stairs. Get the Maiden Suit, Tonic, and Ether. Then examine 
the egg-like thing on the left of the room w/c is a Naga-Ette Bromide. 3 
Henches will attack you. Beat them then exit the room. Don't go down the 
stairs, head right then up to a chest with Steel Saber. Head left to the 
spikes and examine the skull to the left. The spikes will be removed and you 
can now enter the door. Talk to the guard then take the Shining Power Tab. 
Exit the room then head back the stairs and go down. Don't enter the door, go 
left past the Main Hall Way. Head up the next set of stairs. Enter the first 
door you see and talk to all 3 of the creatures here. Talk to them until the 
Diablos leaves the room to go to Magus' Statue. Follow it. Upon entering a 
room, talk to the king, the soldier, and the queen. After talking to them, get 
the chests for 100G and Ether.

Head to the right door to enter Magus' statue. Get the chests for Speed Belt 
and Defender Accessories. Leave the 2 rooms. If you try to leave the room of 
the king, they'll turn to Gnashers and attacks you. Head down the stairs and 
pass through the Main Hallway and enter the door on top. In the next room, use 
the Save Point. Head up the stairs, don't enter the door and head left. Get 
the Chest for a shelter then use the stairs down. Enter the door. In the next 
room, (with bats) don't examine the Skull because it will invite 2 more bats. 
Enter the north door. Move on and get the Tonic and Heal inside the chests. 
Continue left then down one room wherein you'll see another room with a skull. 
Examine it to lower the spikes. Then, head down one room and go up the stairs. 
Take the door in the middle (I suggest you save). Defeat the monsters and take 
the chest for an Iron Sword. Examine the organ to reveal a room on the north 
side of this area that is beside a note. You can take any of the 2 stairs to 
reach that door. Upon entering the door, you'll reach another hallway. Follow 
it then use the Save Point. Enter the Door. Meet the first boss:

Boss:  YAKRA
#############################################################################
HP:  900-1000 
EXP: 50
TP:  5
G:   600
Charmed Item: not possible

To beat him, use Crono and Frog's Dual Tech X Strike to deal a big damage to 
him. Use items with Lucca to heal everyone. If everyone's HP goes down, Let 
everyone use Tonics then continue on with X Strike until he dies.
#############################################################################

////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
/ Please take note that the HP of the bosses are my estimates only, I  \
/ computed the total damage I did to the boss until it died. So, these \
/ HPs are enough to beat that particular boss.                         \
\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\

After beating him, get the right chest for a Mid-Ether. Check the other chest, 
which contains the real Chancellor. Talk to Queen Leene Afterwards then you'll 
be back automatically to Guardia Castle.

GUARDIA CASTLE (600 AD)
-----------------------

You'll start off in the throne room with the King, Queen, and the Chancellor. 
After Frog leaves, talk to Queen Leene. She'll ask you about Marle. Return to 
where Marle disappeared. After Marle reappears, answer her back with the 
'Wrong!Ã® Option. I think it also affects a future event. After Marle joins 
you, go back to the throne room and talk to everyone to hear their reactions 
about Marle. Then, exit and you'll see Frog. After Frog leaves (again), take a 
time to rest in the Knight's Quarters for free. Then, exit the Castle to the 
World Map.

GUARDIA FOREST (600 AD)
-----------------------
Item/s:
   Shelter

Again, take the Shelter from the monster! Exit to World Map. It's now time to 
return to the present time.

TRUCE CANYON (600 AD)
---------------------

Go to Truce Canyon and go to where the portal is. Lucca will show off his gate 
key that can open these portals so it can be used if needed. You'll then 
teleport back to Leene's Square 1000 AD.

LEENE'S SQUARE (1000 AD)
------------------------

Once back, Lucca will leave and Marle will ask you if you can escort her home. 
After regaining control of your characters, you can play with the games as 
much as you want, then afterwards exit to the World Map.

Note: If you're in the new game+ mode, you can examine the shining dot in the 
right pod of Lucca's Device to fight Lavos. You'll fight Lavos with Crono and 
Marle only. The ending here will be quite amusing. Check out Ending #3. 

MARKET (TRUCE VILLAGE 1000 AD)
------------------------------

You'll find new equipments here to buy them if you have the G. Exit to the 
World Map.

MAYOR'S MANOR (1000 AD)
-----------------------
Item/s:
   300 G

Head to the Mayor's Manor and talk to the Mayor on the second floor. He will 
not only give you hints but also a small amount of 300G. Return to World Map 
and go to Guardia Forest.

GUARDIA FOREST (1000 AD)
------------------------
Items/s:
   Power Tab

Here, you'll not see the Monster that carries a shelter. You'll face some new 
enemies here also. There some new items here also. In the place where you 
found 2 shining dots, a new Power Tab can be found shimmering near the trees 
to the left. You can now exit to north because there aren't any more items 
here.

GUARDIA CASTLE (1000 AD)
------------------------
Item/s:
   3 Ethers         1500G
   8 Mid-Tonics
   Bronze Mail
   2 Shelters
   Lode Sword

Upon entering you'll be greeted with a very cold greeting from the Chancellor 
of this castle. He will think that you kidnapped the princess. You will be 
detained and taken to court. In this court scene, your verdict will be based 
on what you did to the princess and the people at Leene's Square. Remember 
those things that would affect a future event? This is that particular event. 
Again, your verdict will be based on a couple of things:

1. After you bump into Marle, check on her first before taking the pendant.
2. Don't talk Marle into selling her pendant to Melchior (equipment shop).
3. Don't take the old man's pack of food.
4. Bring the kitty back to the young girl.
5. Wait for Marle to finish buying her candies.

When the Chancellor asks you who started it, tell him it was you. Then when he 
asks you if you were tempted with her fortunes, tell him 'noÃ® and 'not at 
allÃ®. With this, you'll be proven innocent. But it's just the same if you were 
guilty. Here's what will happen. If you are innocent you'll be given a maximum 
penalty of 3 Days Solitary Confinement (the Chancellor with stir up the system 
and tells the guard that you will be executed even if you are innocent. He 
wants Crono dead). If you are proven guilty you'll be detained and executed 
within 3 days. 

In the detention cell, you'll find a cup which will restore your all your HP 
and MP. If you are innocent, there will be a pack that will contain an ether. 
You can also use the Save Point. Now, don't go near the door. Just stand still 
and WAIT for three days to pass. If you irritate the guards they will attack 
you and you're free but you will only be able to meet Lucca before the Boss. 
If you wait for 3 days, you will be brought to the execution room. When the 
guillotine is ready, Lucca will come in and save you. You can now use Lucca 
until you reach the boss. She can gain EXP so the boss will become easier. 
Here's the description of the 2 ways on how you can reach the boss:

1. If you break you way out
   After defeating the Guards, leave the detention hall. You'll arrive at a 
place where there are 4 stairs. First, don't mind the 2 enemies here just pass 
by them. Just head to the lower right stairs the continue on until you see a 
guard. Beat him and examine the switch to open the room. You'll find Mid-Tonic 
x2, Ether x2. Leave the area and return to the 4-stair room. On your way out, 
you'll see Omnicrone. Just deal a certain amount of damage (218 HP) to him and 
he'll escape. Then, move on and beat those 2 Blue Shields to gain access to 
the 2 stairs. The strategy is simple, wait for them to show their bodies then 
slash away with your sword. Don't go to the upper left stairs because you'll 
only have a fight here. So, head to the upper right stairs. On the small 
bridge, 2 guards'll attack you. They're easy. Beat them and move on until you 
reach an intersection. Head left and beat another Guard to enter the execution 
room. Help the man in the Guillotine and he'll tell you about his shop at 
Truce Village. Then, get the chest (Mid Tonic) and examine the switch to the 
north to open the door. Move north and get the chest for a Bronze Mail. 2 
Decedents will attack you. Beat them then return to the intersection and head 
north. Move on until you reach the second 4-stair room. Head to the lower-left 
stair first and get the chest with a shelter in the right room. Head back to 
the 4-stair room and beat the Blue Shields again. Head to the upper left stair 
and exit through the hole in the second room. You'll now be at the walls of 
the castle. You can now reach the chest, in which its room cannot be opened, 
for a shelter. There will be another hole in the ground. Get in and get the 
chests below for a Lode Sword and 1500G. You can return up by examining the 
wall where you climbed down. After getting the chests, return to the second 4-
stair room. Head to the upper right exit now. Move on until Lucca saves you. 
You can now see a save point and the Manual which gives info about your next 
boss. Read it then SAVE. Examine the Supervisor whom Lucca Blasted. You'll 
receive 5 Mid Tonics. Go to 'Continuation (Trial)Ã®..

2. If you waited for 3 days to pass
   If you waited for 3 days, you will be taken to the execution room. Just 
before you are executed, Lucca comes and saves the day. Upon regaining control 
of your characters, get the chest for a Bronze Mail. Head down to the next 
room and save the man from the Guillotine. He'll tell you about his shop at 
Truce Village. Next, get the chest for a Mid tonic then leave the execution 
room. In the intersection, head left first. Move on until you reach a 4-stair 
room. Don't worry about the upper left stairs. You'll only see an enemy there. 
Now, beat those 2 Blue Shields. The lower left stairs will lead you to the 
detention cell of Crono. You can restore your HP/MP by using the cup and save 
the game! Next, return to the 4-stair room and head down the lower-right 
stairs. Move on until you see a door. Beat the guard and open the door. 
Inside, you'll see 4 chests with Mid-Tonic x2, Ether x2.  Return all the way 
to the execution room. On the way, you'll have to fight Omnicrone. Just deal 
exactly 218 HP damage to him and he'll escape. When you reach the intersection 
near the execution room, head north. Move on until you reach the second 4-
stair room. Head to the lower-left stair first and get the chest with a 
shelter in the right room. Head back to the 4-stair room and beat the Blue 
Shields again. Head to the upper left stair and exit through the hole in the 
second room. You'll now be at the walls of the castle. You can now reach the 
chest in which its room cannot be opened for a shelter. There will be another 
hole in the ground. Get in and get the chests below for a Lode Sword and 
1500G. You can return up by examining the wall where you climbed down. After 
getting the chests, return to the second 4-stair room. Head to the upper right 
exit now. Move on until you see a save point and the Manual which gives info 
about your next boss. Read it then SAVE.

Continuation (Trial)...
After saving and using a Shelter if necessary, head up the stairs you see. On 
the way, the ground will shake. Move on and meet the Boss:

Boss:  DRAGON TANK
#############################################################################
Dragon Tank HP: 300 
Head HP:        700 
Grinder HP:     700 
EXP: 40
G :  500
Charmed Item: Not possible

Destroy the head first as it has the ability to restore HP to all parts of the 
Tank. Destroying will ease the battle. Kill the grinder then the body. You 
cannot use Lucca's Fire Techs as it will be use if the head is still there. 
You can use Crono's Cyclone to damage every part of the Tank making it a bit 
easier to beat.
#############################################################################

After destroying the tank, the bridge will collapse. Don't worry, the 
chancellor will lend you a hand. Move on. Get the chest along the way, it 
contains shelter. When you see 2 guards, walk past them then head to the 
entrance of the castle. The guards will stop you, but eventually Marle will 
reason out to her father and joins you in leaving the castle.

GUARDIA FOREST (1000 AD)
------------------------

After entering the forest, the guards will quickly catch up with you. They got 
you cornered and there's no way out except to the right. Run to the right and 
you'll see a gate. Just before you get captured again, examine the gate and 
you'll be able to escape.

BANGOR DOME (2300 AD)
---------------------

You'll arrive at an unfamiliar place, which is advanced in Technology. Your 
party will notice that you're now in the future. There's nothing to do here so 
leave the Dome and exit to the World Map. And head south and enter Trann Dome. 
Take into consideration that if you stay too long on the world map, your 
characters' HP will slowly deteriorate until it becomes 1. So, if you think 
you already spent too much time on the World Map, go inside into any of the 
domes then come back out to prevent HP loss. 

TRANN DOME (2300 AD)
--------------------

You can buy items and equipments here. You can also use the Enertron, which 
will recover your HP and MP completely. Use it as you please. After doing 
these, there's nothing else left to do so leave the Dome.

LAB 16 (2300 AD)
----------------
Item/s:
   Berserker
   Lode Sword
   Lode Bow
   Ether

Head north in the world map past Bangor Dome and enter Lab 16. There are a few 
items here. Just beware of the rats, they will steal Tonics from you if it 
touches Crono while running/walking. You can get a Berserker when you go all 
the way to the left after entering the Lab entrance near Bangor Dome. On the 
way, you'll see a chest containing another Lode Sword. Now, move on. Again, 
you'll see another chest that is in the way of a running rat. Time it right 
that you reach the chest right after the rat runs the opposite way. You'll get 
a Lode Bow for Marle. Move on and you'll meet a group of shadows. After you 
beat the 3 Shadows, ignore the big plant-like creature and head south to get 
the chest for an ether. Now, move on and head northeast. You'll have to fight 
the Mutant that you'll see here. After beating it, exit to the World Map.

ARRIS DOME (2300 AD)
--------------------
Item/s:
   2 Mid-Ethers

Head to the Arris dome and enter. You'll see a small group of people inside. 
Their leader is the Old Man Doan. After talking to the people, save and buy 
from the kid if necessary. You may also use the Enertron to save shelters. 
Now, speak to Doan and he'll tell you that they cannot get the food from below 
because of the robots. Head to the ladder you see which is in the middle of 
the room. Upon entering, you'll see 2 consoles wherein the one to the right is 
shining. Ignore it for now and climb up the ladder to the left. There's a very 
simple maze here. You have to cross the steel planks to get to the other side. 
When you see a rat, ignore it for now. Here's the direction where you should 
go through the planks to reach the top if ever you didn't get it. First 
intersection, right. second Intersection, up. Third intersection, right then 
fourth intersection, up. On the fifth, turn left. Sixth Intersection, left. 
Seventh intersection, head up. Eighth intersection, head right then finally, 
head north. You'll reach a room with an alarm. Continue walking/running north 
and another boss will stop you:

Boss:  GUARDIAN and 2 BITS
#############################################################################
Guardian HP: 1300
Bit HP:      200 each
EXP:   300
*TP:   -
G:     1000
Charmed Item: Not possible

Try to kill the 2 bits first as they will launch massive attacks like the 
Amplifire attack. When you beat the 2 bits, the Guardian will start a 
countdown. When it reaches 0, the 2 bits will re revived. He's not easy at the 
same time not hard. In short, average difficulty. You can beat them by 
physical attacks and Single or Dual Techs.

New Strategy: from (Stephen - stephen4188@yahoo.com)

To prevent the Amplifire Attack, destroy one of the 2 bits. Doing this, they 
cannot perform the Amplifire Attack. The guardian cannot Revive the single Bit 
until both of them are destroyed. So, destroy one bit and concentrate your 
attacks at Guardian. 
#############################################################################

After beating the Guardian, head north. Your party will see a deceased man. 
After regaining control of your characters, examine the man again and you will 
now know that the rat, which was at the Steel Planks, is not a statue. Get the 
chest for a Mid-Ether. Head back to the Planks. You'll see the rat. Now, try 
to run as fast as you can and catch it. When you think it's near enough, hit 
the A button to catch it. He will tell you that, to gain access to the door 
way back in the entrance (the place with 2 consoles), stand in front of the 
shining console, hold the L and R buttons then press A. Remember that YOU MUST 
talk to the rat first in order to move on. You won't be able to use the code 
at the console if you didn't talk to the rat in the first place.

Now, go back there and do it. When the new path comes up, you can now enter 
the right door. Upon entering, don't go up to neither of the ladders instead, 
head north past the monsters to reach a chest with a Mid-Ether. Now head back 
and walk down the stairs to the left. At the end, walk down the stairs. Move 
on until you see another set of stairs. Walk up the stairs and head north to a 
door. In here, you can actually take any path you like whether take the stairs 
or take the right route. When you reach the first Proto 2 (the robot, not the 
spider looking ones), head left and walk up the stairs. Move on until you 
enter a room with a monitor and a console. Lucca will operate it and you'll 
see the location of the other gate. You will also be shown the Day of Lavos 
1999. When the characters talk to each other, select 'Okay!Ã®. Once outside the 
monitor room, you'll see another console to your right. To reach it, head to 
the place where you saw the first Proto 2 then go north ignoring the ladder. 
Upon reaching it, use the LR + A button code you used to enter this place. It 
will make a path to the sealed door but you can't do anything as of now but 
when you come back here later, you won't have to do it anymore. Now, head back 
to where Doan was. He'll be amazed that you survived below. You will give him 
the seeds you found from the deceased man and he will give you a Bike key you 
can use later at Lab 32. Use the Enertron, save or buy items if necessary, 
then head out to the World Map.

SEWER ACCESS (2300 AD)
----------------------
Item/s:
   600G
   Rage Band
   Bolt Sword

If you want to make it easier when you come back here later I suggest you head 
left to the Sewer Access. You have to activate the bridge here so that you can 
have easy access later. Inside, a guard will pass by. After regaining control, 
head right, defeat the enemies and get the chest for 600G. Then, head all the 
way to the left until you see a scene with two frogs talking to each other. 
Follow them down the ladder. Below, head right. You will see a cat. If you 
examine it, you'll have to fight 3 Nereids. Move on. You'll then see a can and 
a trash bin. If you examine either of them, you'll fight 4 Nereids. Next, 
you'll see a slice of cheese. If you examine it, you'll have to fight 2 
Nereids and a rat. Move on. Next, you'll see a save spot. If you examine it, 
you'll fight 3 Nereids. Finally, climb up the stairs. Above, you'll see a gap 
between a bridge and another bridge to your left. Ignore the bridges and head 
north. You'll see a slight opening in between the wall. Go through here to 
reach a switch, which will open the opposite door. Head back then up. Continue 
pressing the Up Key until Crono Stops. You'll now be able to head right. When 
you see that Crono stops, head down through that door. You'll see another 
scene with the 2 frogs. Anyway, just head right then up to get a Rage Band 
from the chest. Now head right to meet:

Mini-Boss:  KRAWLIE
#############################################################################
HP:    550
EXP:   100
*TP:   - 
G:     500
Item:  Mid-Ether
Charmed Item: Mid Ether

He is so easy. You can beat him with your eyes closed while pressing the A 
button continuously.

* - I haven't seen it... yet.
#############################################################################

After beating Krawlie, move on until you see a ladder. Go past it fast and get 
the chest for a Bolt Sword. Then, press the switch to fill the gap and the 
bridge will now be accessible. Now, don't go back to climb the ladder. 
Instead, cross the bridge you just activated and you'll notice that you've 
been here already. Now head all the way back to the ladder which you used to 
enter this area and exit to the World Map. Note: The ladder at the end will 
send you to the World Map but it is on a remote island. You can find the 
Keeper's Dome and the Death Peak there. But you don't have to go there yet.

LAB 32 (2300 AD)
----------------
Item:
   Race Log

Now, head north to Lab 32. In the lab, head north and examine the Jet Bike 
(you will automatically use Doan's Bike key on it). 4 Proto 2s will attack 
you. fortunately, Johnny will come and stop the robots from attacking. 
Instead, he'll challenge you to a race through Lab 32. you must beat him in 
order to reach the end of Lab 32. Here's a tip. You can just sit back and 
watch until you are close enough to the finish line and push that B Button for 
a speed boost. You only have 3 boosts and you must use it only if you are in 
front of Johnny. He will always try to stay in front of you so watch out. 
Again, if you win, you'll be at the end of Lab 32. but if you lose, don't 
worry. You can always challenge him to the race or you can ignore him and just 
walk/run through Lab 32. I recommend walking because you'll gain experience in 
the process and an item along the way. You can get the race Log item that will 
record the scores you get every time you race Johnny. At the start of the race 
your score will start from 0 and will increase during the race. But, if you 
managed to stay in front and not allow Johnny to even get beside you, when he 
bumps your back you'll receive points. But if Johnny is in your front and you 
bump into him, you'll lose points. Anyway, once you reach the end in any 
manner you like, exit to the World Map.

PROTO DOME (2300 AD)
--------------------

In the World Map, don't go to the factory yet. Head to Proto Dome first. 
Inside just move on and use the Enertron if you like. When you see a Robot, 
Lucca will repair it. Then, you can name R66-Y as Robo (any name will do, 
we'll just use Robo for the sake of the walkthrough). Then, you'll tell him 
that you need to get to the gate to be transported back to 1000 AD. He will 
agree to help you in turn for fixing him. Choose from Marle or Lucca who will 
stay behind. As for me, I left Lucca the first time I played because Marle has 
Curative Magic. Once Robo joins your party, leave Proto Dome and head to the 
Factory up north.

FACTORY (2300 AD)
-----------------
Item/s:
   2 Shelters    Robin Bow
   Titan Vest    Plasma Gun
   Hammer Arm    2 Ethers
   400 G         Mid Ether
   Bolt Sword

Inside, examine the console that you'll see there and Robo will deactivate the 
laser in front of the conveyor belts so that you can continue on. Kill the 
acid that shows up. Use the conveyor belt and use the right elevator first.

In here, there are 2 ladders to the south. Go to the ones on the left and get 
the Robin Bow at the end. After getting the Robin Bow, go back up the ladder 
and then use the other ladder to the right. Here, move on until you see a door 
and the conveyor belt. Now, walk to ON the conveyor belt and go to the left. 
Try to evade the Proto 3s here because if they were able to you, you'll be 
taken to another conveyor belt. Now, continue walking to left on the conveyor 
belt. Get the chest for an Ether on the way. After getting the ether, continue 
going left and enter the door to the south at the end. In the next area, just 
move on and enter the door. Next, go to the top of the screen for a Mid-Tonic. 
And then, go left a bit and enter the door to the north. Here, get the 2 
chests for 400 G and Mid-Ether. Now, examine the computer and it'll tell you 
about the crane controls. Leave this room. Go left from the door and enter 
another new room to the left. 

Inside, get the 2 chests for a shelter and an Ether. Now, exit through the 
lower left door. You'll be able to control the crane. You have to push 2 
buttons in order to command the crane. First, press B and then A and the crane 
will remove the barrel. Second, press X and then A and the crane will remove 
another Barrel. Now, go back to the previous room. Then, use the ladder to the 
left of the door you just came through. You can pass now as the barrels are 
gone. At the end, enter the room and get the Bolt Sword from the chest. Then, 
examine the computer and it will translate the password 'ZABIEÃ® into 'XABYÃ® 
meaning, you have to press X A B Y (you'll see what I mean later). Now, leave 
this room and go all the way to the right (don't go up the ladders on the way 
just use the ones at the end). After getting the items and knowing the clue to 
the password, leave this area and head back to the first room here in the 
Factory, then use the left elevator.

Below, there is a save point. You can also head north to a chest containing a 
shelter. After beating the Acid and Alkalines, examine the computer to open 
the hatch right below the chest and reveal a ladder. Head down. Move on until 
you see a laser. Enter the door that you see. You can pass through the wall on 
the left to reach the chest containing another Titan Vest. Then, head right 
for another chest containing a more powerful arm for Robo, the Hammer Arm. 
Now, examine the computer beside the 4 lasers. It will deactivate all lasers 
in the factory. But you have to survive the fight against acids and alkalines. 
Now head to the elevator to the right of this area. If you select up, you'll 
be brought to the floor with the save point you saw earlier. Save if you want 
to then head to the lowest floor. Here, ignore the ladder to your left. It 
will lead you back to the computer room where you turned off the lasers. So 
follow the hallway north. There is a locked door. There is also a chest 
containing a Plasma Gun for Lucca. To open the door you have to press a 
sequence of buttons. The clue is 'ZabieÃ®. If you pronounce it, you'll see that 
it is equivalent to the buttons 'XABYÃ®. So punch X,A,B,Y. The door will open. 
Head north then push the switch. The emergency system will activate. You're so 
lucky that you weren't trapped in. After regaining control of your characters, 
use the ladder as the elevators are shut down. On the way, you will encounter 
Robo's past friends. These robots will beat up Robo pretty badly. Now you have 
to fight all 6 of them. Together, they are a single boss.

Boss:  R SERIES
#############################################################################
HP:   300 each
EXP:  480
*TP:  -
G:    600
Charmed Item: not possible

It's not that hard. Just use Crono's Cyclone to damage more Robots in one 
turn. If you have Marle, have her attack but let her heal the both of them if 
their HP runs low. If you have Lucca, use her flame attacks and if your HPs 
are low, let her use Tonics or Mid Tonics.

* - Because my party members have complete Single Techs, the amount of TP 
gained is not shown. I'll include this in the next update.
#############################################################################

After you beat them, whoever is in your party will get Robo and you will 
automatically go to Proto Dome. You'll actually see you party members carry 
Robo to Proto Dome. 

PROTO DOME (2300 AD)
--------------------

Lucca will repair Robo once more then Robo will officially join your party. 
The door is now open and your party will now use the Gate.

END OF TIME
-----------

You will arrive in an eerie and dark place. Move on through the door and 
you'll meet up with the an Old Man. He'll tell you that you are at the end of 
time. And that happened because you are in a group of 4. Only a group of 3 can 
use the gate at a time. He'll also tell you that the pillars of light you saw 
a while ago connects to different times. After regaining control of your 
characters, you may restore you HP/MP if you examine the shining dot near the 
save point. Don't try to use the other shining dot as this one leads directly 
to the last boss of the game, LAVOS (if you examined the bucket and defeated 
Lavos, you'll get Ending #4). I'm absolutely, perfectly, undoubtedly sure that 
you are not prepared to fight him (unless you're in the New Game+ mode or you 
played for DAYS leveling up your characters to 40+). Let's move on. Head back 
to the pillars of light. On the way, the Old Man will call your attention. 
Talk to him and he'll tell you to take a peek on the next room. Inside, you'll 
find Spekkio the Master of War. His form will depend entirely upon your 
levels, more to that later. Talk to him and if he asks you a question, answer 
'Strong!Ã®. He'll the tell you more about Magic. That it was used years before 
Crono's time. He'll teach you how to use Magic if you WALK around the room 
clockwise 3 times. WALK, don't hold the run button. After walking around 3 
times, talk to him again and he'll give you the power of magic. 
Crono/Lightning, Lucca/Fire, Marle/Ice, Robo can't use Magic but Spekkio will 
tell him that his laser attacks have a little Shadow Magic. Then he'll ask you 
if you want to try it out. If you win, you'll receive items. 

Here are the items you can get by beating him:

Level 1 - 19     Special Refresher: 1 Magic Tab, 5 Ethers
Level 20 - 29    Choice: 1 Magic Tab, 5 Mid Ethers
Level 30 - 39    Healthy Choice: 1 Magic Tab, 5 Full Ethers
Level 40 - 98    Graceful: 1 Magic Tab, 1 Speed Tab, and 1 Power Tab 
Level 99         Cheerful: 10 Magic Tabs, 10 Speed Tabs, 10 Power Tabs,
                 and 10 MegaElixirs
(Thanks to Brandon Boucher: TheDOORS66@aol.com for the info)

If you didn't win, don't worry, your HP/MP will be restored. After fighting 
him, return to the Old Man and talk to him. He'll tell you that you have to go 
to your own time first to be able to change what you want. So go to the light 
pillars and go to Pillar #6 to Medina Village 1000AD. Here's the sketch of the 
Pillars:

  #1    #2    #3

  #4    #5    #6
  
  #7    #8    #9

Locations and Time:
1 - Bangor Dome (2300 AD)
2 - Tyran Fortress (65,000,000 BC)
3 - Truce Canyon (600 AD)
4 - Mystic Mountains (65,000,000 BC)
5 - Proto Dome (2300 AD)
6 - Medina Village (1000 AD)
7 - Leene's Square (1000 AD)
8 - Earth Bound Island (12,000 BC)
9 - Guardia Forest (1000 AD)

If you use the bucket, the Old Man mentioned, you'll fight Lavos. The final 
boss. If you did, you'll get ending #4. If you don't want to fight yet, or if 
this is just your first game, don't examine it.

MEDINA VILLAGE (RESIDENCE  1000 AD)
-----------------------------------

You'll be transported to a residence of a Mystic in Medina village. When you 
try to exit, the Mystic will tell you that there is a man who lives west of 
their place. So head out to the World Map. Before leaving, you can examine the 
cake here. The mystic will offer it to you. If you accept, it will replenish 
the HP and MP of your Team Members. 

MEDINA SQUARE (1000 AD)
-----------------------

Go to Medina Square in the middle of the village. Here you'll learn fact about 
what happened years ago in the war of the Mystics vs. humans. Just came here 
to learn, that's all. The game won't be exciting without the story right? Go 
back to World Map again.

EDLER'S HOUSE -MEDINA VILLAGE(1000 AD)
--------------------------------------
Item/s:
   Speed Tab
   Magic Tab

Go to the Elder's House. First, get the shining speed Tab in the kitchen. Now, 
go to the second floor of the house to get a shining Magic Tab on the desk. 
Then, head back out to the World Map. If you want to sleep at Medina Inn, you 
have to fight the Hench and the Diablos first. Pay 200 G afterwards.

MARKET -MEDINA VILLAGE(1000 AD)
-------------------------------

When you enter the Market, the Mystics will attack you then they will allow 
you to buy from them. But look at that Price, it's unbelievable. I've got 
outrageous prices. All the Equipments are at Maximum, 65,000G EACH. The Tonic 
is at 2,440G, Revive at 48,800G! I guess this is random, or the battle might 
have an effect. If you're so strong that you can beat the two with one slash 
each (i.e. New Game+), the higher the price will be. If you're quite weak and 
took a few hits, the price will be lower. I've seen also some of the prices. 
The Tonic is at 470G, 1100G. I suggest that you don't buy anything because you 
can't afford it. Just head back out to the World Map.

FOREST RUINS (1000 AD)
----------------------
Item:
   Mid Ether

Go to the Forest ruins, which is like a triangle to the north. Just get the 
chest with a Mid Ether then head back out to the world map.

MELCHIOR'S HUT (1000 AD)
------------------------

Go all the way to the east to Melchior's Hut. You'll notice that he is the 
weapons merchant at Leene's Square when you started the game, if you don't 
know him. You can buy weapons from him at reasonable prices. After buying 
weapons, if necessary, go north to Heckran Cave.

HECKRAN CAVE (1000 AD)
----------------------
Item/s:
   2 Ethers
   Magic Scarf
   Mid Ether

Upon entering, 2 Henches will attack you. After beating them, move on until 
you see a ladder. Climb down the ladder and get the Ether inside the chest. 
Continue heading down then move on. On the way, a Jinn Bottle and 3 
Octoblushes'll attack you. After beating them, move on. 2 Tempurites will 
attack you on the way. If you observe carefully, you'll notice that most of 
them are unsusceptible to physical attacks so use Magic instead. When the path 
splits in to 2, head to the south. Fight 3 RolyPolys and get the chest but 
just before you do that, 3 Cave Bats'll attack you. Get that Magic scarf after 
beating them. Return back to the intersection and take the upper path. Take 
another chest that contains a Mid Ether. Move north until you reach another 
chest that contains an Ether. Now head south. Defeat the 4 Tempurites and head 
south to the next area. Now fight against 4 more Rolypolys. Now head left and 
fight those Cave Bats. Now enter the passageway you see. Fight another batch 
of enemies with a Jinn Bottle and 3 Octoblushes. Move on. You'll see a black 
chest here but you can't do anything to it now so enter the passageway to the 
north. When you reach the waterway, head right. You'll eventually reach a 
ladder. Climb up and use that save point. Prepare yourself to battle against:

Boss:  HECKRAN
#############################################################################
HP:   2200
EXP:  250
TP:   10 
G:    1500
Charmed Item: not possible

He's a little hard. Physical attacks won't do well so stick to your magic. 
When he tells you to attack him, don't. Just stall for a moment until he stops 
that attacking pose. If you attack him during his pose, he will counter attack 
with Water Wave, which you don't want to happen. You can beat him on your 
first try though. Just keep on healing.
#############################################################################

After beating him, Lucca suggests that you use the Gate at Leene Square. So 
head north until you see a small pool of water. Jump in. You will be 
transported near Lucca's House through a giant whirlpool. Go to Lucca's House.

LUCCA'S HOUSE (1000 AD)
-----------------------
Item:
   Taban Vest

Go to the second floor of the house using the right stairs. Talk to Lucca's 
Mom. Wait until Taban comes in and gives his earnings to Lucca's Mom. After he 
leaves, return to the Living room and talk to Taban. He will give Lucca a 
special armor he made himself. The Taban Vest. Return to the World Map.

MARKET (TRUCE VILLAGE 1000 AD)
------------------------------
Item:
   10 Mid Ethers

If you saved Fritz back at Guardia Castle during the execution of Crono, if 
you talk to him here, he'll give you 10 Mid Ethers for your help. After 
buying, if necessary, return to the world map.

LEENE'S SQUARE (1000 AD)
------------------------

Go to Leene's Square and use the Gate where Lucca's invention is. You'll end 
up at the End of time. Note that you will always pass through here whenever 
you use ANY of the gates.

END OF TIME
-----------

Here, you can restore your HP/MP, Save and change party members. You will also 
notice that pillars #3 and #7 are now accessible. Use pillar #3 to Truce 
Canyon 600 AD.

When you arrive at Truce Canyon. GO BACK to the End of Time and beat Lavos now 
and achieve ending #5. Do this only if you are at Levels 40 and above or if 
you're in the New Game+ mode. If not, move on.

ZENAN BRIDGE (600 AD)
---------------------
Item:
   Shelter

Leave Truce Canyon. In the World Map, you'll notice that Zenan Bridge is now 
complete. But there seems to be a problem so enter Zenan Bridge. Here, talk to 
the Knight Captain and he'll ask you if the rations from the castle are on the 
way. So, go to Guardia Castle. Remember to take that free Shelter on Guardia 
Forest.

GUARDIA CASTLE (600 AD)
-----------------------
Item/s:
   Ether
   Jerky
   Power Tab
   Shelter

Upon entering, head to the right at once and down the stairs to the Kitchen. 
Find the chef who is running all around. Talk to him then take the somewhat 
camouflaged chest beside the pot for an ether. Now head back to the entrance. 
On the way, the chef will call you and will give you the Jerky so that you can 
give it to the army fighting at Zenan Bridge. You'll also be given a power 
tab! Now head back out to the world map and head to Zenan Bridge. Again, get 
that shelter from the monster in the forest. This will be the last time I 
shall remind of this. You can stock up on as many shelters as you want, just 
keep on leaving and coming right back in the forest.

ZENAN BRIDGE (600 AD)
---------------------
Item:
   Gold Helm

Once there, give the Jerky to the Knight Captain. Suddenly, one of the 
soldiers will come and tell the Captain that Magus' troops are breaking 
through. After regaining your characters, talk to the Captain and tell him 
that you agree to help them. He will give you a Gold Helm after agreeing. Now 
head left to the bridge and prepare for battle. Here, you'll be introduced to 
Ozzie, Magus' general. He'll summon 2 deceased and you'll have to fight them. 
To make the battle short, attack Ozzie instead. He'll loose his control over 
the deceased and will run away. After that, head left for another fight, now 
with 3 Deceased. Beat them, and prepare yourself for a boss.

Boss:  ZOMBOR
#############################################################################
Upper Body HP:  1300
Lower Body HP:  1000
EXP:   350
TP:    10
G:     1500
Charmed Item: not possible

He's not that hard. I simply attacked the upper part of his body. But beware! 
After you beat the upper body, he'll use MP Buster that will steal ALL MPs 
from one of your party members. For the lower body, it can tolerate physical 
attacks better than the upper body. So, use Crono's Lightning Magic or Lucca's 
Fire Magic to deal a good amount of damage. After you beat both of the parts, 
you win! Duh!
#############################################################################

After beating Zombor, continue moving left and you'll exit to the world map in 
the Village of San Dorino. You can but items from the Market also if you need 
them. Go to the Elder's House.

ELDER'S HOUSE -SAN DORINO(600 AD)
---------------------------------

After you enter, you'll eavesdrop on the chief and a man named Toma talking 
about a 'Rainbow ShellÃ® which can create reflective armors that are very  
strong against magic.  Now, return to the World Map and head to the residence.

RESIDENCE -SAN DORINO(600 AD)
-----------------------------
Item:
   Magic Tab

Talk to the people here if you like. You'll find a shining dot in the drawer 
but it is locked. Talk to the Old Man that you see and he'll trade your Naga-
Ette Bromide for a Magic Tab (Thanks to Lorne Dixon for the Info), it's on the 
drawer with the shining dot. Exit to the World Map for now.

FIONA'S VILLA (600 AD)
----------------------
Item/s:
   2 Mid Ether

Go to Fiona's Village in the middle of the desert. Talk to her then take the 2 
chests for 2 Mid-Ethers. Return to the World Map again.

CURSED WOODS (600 AD)
---------------------
Item/s:
   Shelter
   Mid Tonic
   Magic Scarf

Now go south a bit then head left through the trees and enter the Cursed 
Woods. In Cursed woods, you can find a Mid-Tonic, a Shelter inside 2 chests. 
Now, head all the way to the north and move behind the bush where a frog came 
out. Enter it, it is a ladder. Below, you'll see Frog. Talk to him a couple of 
times until he says 'The hero I am not, I can do naughtÃ®. Now go to the pot on 
the upper right portion of Frog's place. Examine it go get another Magic 
Scarf. Head back out to the World Map.

MARKET -PORRE(600 AD)
---------------------
Item:
   Power Tab

You can go to the Market that is right beside the Inn. You can buy an armor 
and a helmet here. You can also find a shining Power Tab to the left. Get it 
then head back out to the World Map.

PORRE VILLAGE (600 AD)
----------------------

You can also head to the different houses to learn more info about Tata, the 
supposed Legendary Hero with the Medal. After learning that he moved north, 
return to the World Map and head north to Denadoro Mountains. Note, don't go 
to the Magic Cave yet because you don't have the Masamune. We'll go there 
later.

DENADORO MOUNTAINS (600 AD)
---------------------------
Item/s:
   Ether          600G
   2 Revives      2 Mid Tonics
   500G           Silver Stud
   4 Mid Ethers   Silver Erng
   300G           Magic Tab
   Shelter        Broken Masamune
   Hero Medal     MirageHand

Bring Lucca with you. You'll need her fire magic in this place. Upon reaching 
a ladder, you'll see a kid who is being chased by a Goblin. After beating the 
goblin an Ogan will come and attack you. With the hammer, his defense rises 
both physically and magically, but if you use any of Lucca's Fire Magic, the 
hammer will burn and you now have a helpless little goblin. Now, don't go up 
the ladder yet. To right and go up the stream onto the next area. Here, you'll 
see a sleeping Ogan on the top. You'll be able to get a chest here that 
contains Robo's MirageHand. After getting the weapon, go back to where you saw 
the Kid.

Climb the ladder. In this area, there's a sleeping goblin. Don't come near 
him. Instead, move up slowly until the Goblin is lined up with Crono so you 
can get the chest to the left. Here's the diagram if you need it:

    Chest ----------- Crono ----------- Sleeping Goblin
                        |
                        |
                      ladder

After aligning the three, push the left button on the Direction-pad to reach 
the chest on the left for an ether. Now, head to the top of the ladder and do 
not go down. Walk left then head south until you reach the area where you saw 
the kid. You'll now be able to get that chest on the ledge for a Revive. Now 
head north again. Fight the goblin if you like. If you examine the Goblin he 
will continue to sleep, but when go continue north, a free lancer with throw a 
stone to the goblin to wake him up. You have to fight them now. After beating 
them, head north and cross the wooden bridge you see. Then, climb up the next 
ladder you see. Defeat the 2 Goblins and take the chest for 500G. Cross the 
wooden bridge to your right. Now, walk down SLOWLY and when you see a goblin 
running, time it right that it doesn't catch you. Head up the ladder and 
continue to the next area. When the path splits into two, take the upper path 
first and take the chest for a Mid-Ether. Return to the intersection and head 
right. Take the chest you see for a Revive. Now, head up the ladder. Get 
another chest for a Gold Helm. Head up the ladder and continue heading left. 
When the path splits into 2, head to the lower path first, climb down the 
ladder and get the chest for a Mid-Tonic. Head all the way up the left to 
enter the area with a big waterfall. Climb up the two ladders here onto the 
next area. Don't forget to get that Mid-Ether on the way. Btw, the free lancer 
that throws stones at you will give you an accessory. Take a look at the 
accessories section. In this new area, head up another ladder and get the 
chest for 600G. Now prepare you characters for 4 continuous fight. It means 
that, right after you beat a batch of enemies, you'll have to fight the next 
batch right away. First batch, Ogan and Goblin. Second Batch, Ogan and Free 
Lancer. Third batch, Ogan and Goblin again. Fourth Batch, Ogan and 2 Free 
Lancers. After that fight, head left to the next area. Here, get the chest 
right away for 300G. Head north. After beating the Free Lancers and the 
Bellbird, get the chest you see for a Mid-Tonic.

Now if you want, you can get a few extra, but VERY HELPFUL items. In the 
river, if you head south, you'll see a large waterfall. If the waterfall 
washes you away, you'll end up in a new area with one chest. But, there is 
another way to get an extra chest. So follow, my instructions carefully. 
First, go to the center of the river. WALK down slowly, little by little and 
head to the waterfall. When the huge waterfall starts to pull you in, push the 
left button on the Directional-pad and run until a small waterfall pulls you 
in. Let this small waterfall pull you in and Jump in the waterfall. You'll 
reach a chest with the Silver Stud w/c will cut the MP usage of any Magic/Tech 
of the character it is equipped with. Example, if Crono can use Luminaire, the 
Ultimate magic, he uses 20 MPs which is 20% of the MAX MP he can have. But if 
you equip him with the Silver Stud, he will use only 10 MP or 10% of the MAX 
MP he can have w/c is 99. If you you're thinking that there's a Gold Stud, 
you're correct, it can be obtained later in the game. It cuts MP use by 75%. 
Now, back to the Walkthrough.

After getting the Silver Stud, head towards the cliff and jump off the ledge. 
You'll land on another area and you can get a chest for a SilverErng. It will 
increase your Maximum HP by 25%. Example:

If Crono has 500 HPs, if you equip him with the SilverErng, his Maximum HP 
will be raised by 25%, w/c is 125. So, his Maximum HP will become 625.

After getting these accessories, head north through the woods and you'll be 
brought to another area. Then, in this area head north right away. You'll be 
back to the place where you fought 4 times in a row. Fortunately, you don't 
have to fight them again. When you reach the river where you jumped off the 
waterfall, head north and all the way to the left, and get the chest past the 
ladder for a Mid-Ether. Climb down the ladder and head to the next Area. Here, 
cross the wooden bridge and you'll see a monster that looks like Spekkio. Talk 
to him 4 times and he'll give you a Magic Tab. Move on to the next area. Here, 
you'll finally find a Save Point. Save and Restore HP/MP then head down the 
ladder on the left. Get another chest for a Mid-Ether then continue heading 
down. Head down another set of ladders and go right to another area. Here, 
you'll see a short ladder. Climb down and they will jump once you reach the 
end of the ladder. Get the chest you see for a Shelter. After beating the 
enemies, head north through a cave-like opening. Head north towards the sword 
and the kid will stop you. If he asks you if you want the Masamune, tell him 
yes. He'll call his brother Masa. Then, Masa and Mune will test you and will 
engage your party.

Boss:  MASA and MUNE
#############################################################################
Masa HP: 1000
Mune HP: 1000
Exp:  400
TP:   4
G:    400
Charmed Item: not possible

They are easy. Just keep on attacking them using physical attacks and Techs 
that do physical damage. If one of them goes down, so is the other. After you 
beat them you'll have to fight:

Strategy by: Brandon Boucher (TheDOORS66@aol.com)

Just concentrate on attacking one of them. It will save your characters HP as 
well as it will save you time. You don't have to attack the other one at all. 
#############################################################################

Boss:  MASA and MUNE (combined)
#############################################################################
HP:  3500
Exp: 500
TP:  10 
G:   1500
Charmed Item: not possible

He is pretty tough. You MUST have a healer in your party. Use items with one 
of your characters or if you have Marle, make her the healer. Use your 2 other 
members to attack and use dual techs if possible.

Strategy by: Lorne Dixon (lornedixon@hotmail.com)

To make the fight a bit easier, when Masa and Mune starts to store its power, 
use Crono's Slash Tech to dissipate the energy so that they can't use their 
most powerful attack. 

#############################################################################

After you proved your worth to the 2, you can now retrieve the broken 
Masamune. You now have to find who will fix it then. After retrieving it, Masa 
and Mune will transport you to the Base of the Mountain. I'm just so glad I 
will not have to go through the entire mountain again. You'll be transported 
to the World Map. If you think carefully, you'll remember that Melchior, the 
Swordsmith in Medina Village 1000 AD, is good a sword craftsmanship. But 
first, go to Tata's House in Porre. Talk to Tata, the kid you saw in Denadoro 
Mts., and he'll tell you that he only got it from FROG who dropped the Medal. 
Everybody called him hero so he kept it. After talking to him, he'll give it 
to you. Now return the Medal to the rightful owner, Frog.

Right before giving it back to frog. You can go back to the End of Time and 
beat Lavos using the bucket, to get ending #6.

CURSED WOODS (600 AD)
---------------------

Go to Cursed woods and talk to Frog. He'll recognize the Medal. After telling 
you that he has no right to wield the Masamune, he'll move and you shall 
notice the pot is now glittering. Examine it and you'll see the other half of 
the Masamune Blade. You will then discover that the word 'roichlemÃ® is 
written. It's Melchior! :) Now leave the cursed woods and go to Truce Canyon 
and teleport to the End of Time.

END OF TIME
-----------

Now, do what you should always do here. Restore HP/MP, change party members if 
necessary and save. After that, use pillar #6 to Medina Village 1000 AD. When 
you reach 1000 AD, head to Melchior's Hut.

MELCHIOR'S HUT (1000 AD)
------------------------

Talk to Melchior. He'll be surprised that you have the Masamune Blade. He will 
then tell you to get Dream stones, which are not around anymore for a long 
time. Did you guess it? Yup. You have to go to the prehistoric era to get it. 
So go to the Residence and use the gate. Do the thing you normally do at the 
End of time then finally, use pillar #4 to Mystic Mountains 65,000,000 BC.

MYSTIC MOUNTAIN (65,000,000 BC)
-------------------------------
Item/s:
   Berserker
   Third Eye
 
Right after you are teleported, you'll fall right away. There will be reptites 
roaming around and they will attack your party. The technique in beating these 
reptites is for you to use Lightning Attacks. After beating these Reptites, 
more will come your way. But then, a cave-woman will come and beat some of the 
reptites. All leftovers are for you to deal with. After beating them, the 
woman will return and introduce herself. Her name is Ayla. After some talking, 
she tells you to follow her to her village, Ioka. Quickly, follow Ayla. On the 
way, you'll see a green chest. Take the first one for a Berserker. When you 
have returned to the World Map, head east to see the village. You'll see 4 
huts. Enter the Lower Right Hut first. You can talk to the woman here if you 
want to drink some sweet water that will replenish your HP and MP. Next, you 
can visit the Upper right hut and trade your G and your items (specifically 
the petals, fangs, horns, and feather) here are the items you can trade for 
and the quantity you need. Remember that you must have Ayla join your party 
first.

Item/Equipment   Requirements
Ruby Gun         = 3 Petals and 3 Fangs
Sage Bow         = 3 Petals and 3 Horns
Stone Arm        = 3 Petals and 3 Feathers
Flint Edge       = 3 Fangs and 3 Horns
Ruby Vest        = 3 Fangs and 3 Feathers
Rock Helm        = 3 Horns and 3 Feathers

Note: If you are in need of these items, head to the hunting Range North of 
Ioka Village. If it rains, quickly roam around the Hunting Range and find that 
Nu (Blue Monster) it'll give you a good quantity of all items. All enemies 
here have items here are the items that you can get from a certain monster:

Group of Amphibite, Croaker, Rain Frog = 2 Feathers, 2 Fangs and 2 Horns
Group of Ion and Anion = 2 Petals and 2 Feathers
Nu = 3 of every trading item (as a bonus, he'll give you a Third Eye)

Let's Continue. One of the people in this hut will sell you a Tonic, Mid-
tonic, and Heal. Now, head to the chief's hut. Talk to Ayla and the scene will 
automatically be brought to the Jurassic Party! You can talk to anyone here. 
To continue the story. Speak to your party members, including Ayla, until Ayla 
offers you the Jurassic Soup. When you regain control of Crono, talk to your 
party members and drink the soup. Talk to your party members again until Ayla 
brings up the topic regarding the Red rock. She will then challenge you to a 
soup race. Gulp as many soup as many you can by tapping the A button as fast 
as you can. If you lose to her, start again until you win. After you win 
you'll a good night sleep. But when you wake up, you'll notice that your Gate 
Key is missing. The footprints on the ground suggest that Reptites are the 
crooks. Your party will then agree to meet Ayla. In Ayla's hut, wake her up. 
She'll join you in your search of the Gate Key. When you leave, you can now 
trade your petals, etc. for equipments. The items and their requirements are 
written above. You can go to the lower right hut and the man in the middle 
will give you a Tonic. Now, go to the lower left hut and talk to everyone here 
to know where to go next. Now, head south of the village and enter the Forest 
Maze.

FOREST MAZE (65,000,000 BC)
---------------------------
Item/s:
   3 Mid Tonics
   2 Revives
   2 Mid Ethers
   Shelter
   Heal

After entering the Forest Maze, you'll see Kino. He'll tell you that he took 
the Gate Key because he is jealous. Then, he'll also tell you that the 
Reptites took it away from him. So, to get to the Reptites Lair, follow the 
footsteps and go through any path available to get extra items. If you somehow 
weren't able to cross to another part, use a vine as a ladder if you see one 
or use the fallen trees as bridges. Just follow the footsteps and you'll never 
be lost. On the way, you'll find chests that contain, Mid-Tonic x3, Revive x2, 
Mid-Ether x2, Shelter, Heal. After following the footsteps, you'll exit to the 
world map near the Reptite Lair. Enter the Lair.

REPTITE LAIR (65,000,000 BC)
----------------------------
Item/s:
   2 Mid Ethers    Elixir
   Ruby Vest
   2 Full Tonics
   Rock Helm
   Full Ether

Inside, head through the cave to the right to the next area. In this area, 
you'll see evilweevils roaming around and digging holes. If you want treasure, 
wait until all Evilweevils, the blue shark-like monsters, have finished 
digging. For your information, once an Evilweevil digs, he'll disappear from 
the area mainly because it fell down the hole. Now, after waiting for them to 
finish. There will be 5 holes in the ground. Don't worry about it because 
these are at random. The holes lead to different rooms/route below, but the 
ultimate goal here is to arrive in a big room filled with reptites running 
crazy around. There are 4 routes to take. Example, if you take route 1, you'll 
be passing through a set of rooms unique to route 1. It means that, the hole 
in route 1 leads to a different path from the holes in route 2, 3, and 4 and 
vice-versa. In short, you can take any route you like to reach the big room. 
Each route has different treasures in it. Here's something interesting, you 
can actually get ALL of the treasures and pass through ALL routes. It means 
that you can pass through route 1 and after you reached the big room, you can 
actually go back to the room where the evilweevils are digging and take 
another route.  I'll explain how later. Here's the graph of the routes you can 
pass through. So, if you want to use route #2, jump in the hole created by the 
EvilWeevils, which is to the North Easternmost. If you want to use route 3, 
jump in the hole that is on the South Westernmost. I you don't know which 
route is which, I have a graph of the rooms of the routes after you jump in 
from the first holes. Note that if the EvilWeevils didn't dig the holes 
properly, i.e. they dug holes wherein the holes they created can't give you 
access to the route you want to take. If this happens, head out to the world 
map and re-enter the Lair.

 ------------- -------------
|             |             |
|   Route 1   |   Route 2   |
|             |             |
 ------------- -------------
|             |             |
|   Route 3   |   Route 4   |
|             |             |
 ------------- -------------

Here are the different info about each route, refer to this mini-guide about 
the enemies and treasures you can get:

Route 1:

In the first room, you'll have to fight 2 EvilWeevils in order to jump down 
the hole. Take note that you always have to defeat the enemies first before 
jumping down the holes. In the next room, you'll face a Megasaur. To weaken 
it, use Crono's Lightning magic. Then attack it continuously until it dies. 
Head down the hole. You've now reached the big room! Skip routes 2, 3, and 4 
and Go to The Big Room.

Route 2:

Note: if you wait for the evilweevils, one of them will dig at the bottom 
right corner of the screen. This will lead you to a room with an Elixir.

In this room, you'll have to fight 2 EvilWeevils and 2 Fly Traps. After 
beating them, get the chest for a Mid-Ether then jump down the hole. Here, 
you'll have to fight a Flytrap and 2 EvilWeevils. Get the chest for a Ruby 
Vest. Head down the hole to reach the big room! Skip routes 3 and 4 and go to 
the Big Room.

Route 3:

In the first room, fight an Evilweevil and a flytrap. Get the chest for a Mid-
Ether afterwards. Jump down the hole. In here, another pair of EvilWeevil and 
a Fly Trap. Get the chest for a Full Tonic and jump down the hole. Voila! The 
Big room! Skip route 4 and go to the Big Room.

Route 4:

I the first room, you'll fight an EvilWeevil and a Fly Trap. Then, get the 
chest for a Full Tonic. Jump down the hole.  You may be familiar to this room. 
It is the same as the second room in route #2. The enemies here are 2 
EvilWeevils and a Fly Trap, and the chest contains the Ruby Vest. Jump down 
the hole to the Big Room!

The Big Room:

Here in the Big room, you'll see those running Reptites, defeat them for EXP. 
Then, there are 2 Reptites guarding 2 chests. The lower chest contains a Rock 
Helm and the upper ones contain a Full Ether. After getting the treasures, 
leave through the northeast exit. Here, you'll have to fight the Winged Ape 
and a Shitake. After beating them, head north. You'll have to fight another 
batch of monsters. After beating them, you can take the left cave-like opening 
and it will bring you back to where the Evilweevils dug holes. You can 
therefore, take another one of the routes. You can always use any route as 
many times as you like to gain exp or G. But remember that, on the way, you'll 
meet up with a winged ape and you must beat him in order to jump the hole to 
reach the EvilWeevil room.

If you want to go to the exit of the Reptite lair, move straight ahead and 
don't enter the cave that will bring you back to the evilweevil room. You'll 
encounter a Megasaur and 2 Reptites. After beating them, a save point will 
show up to the right. Save and use a shelter if necessary then head up the 
stairs to the north. You'll meet Azala, the leader of the Reptites. You can 
answer him with any choice when he asks you. Then, he will call..

Boss:  NIZBEL
#############################################################################
HP:  4000
Exp: 500
TP:  10
G:   0
Charmed Item: Third Eye

He is hard. First, you have to shock him with Crono's Lightning Magic. Then, 
pummel him with Ayla's Techs and Crono's Attacks/Techs. Have the other 
character heal. After a while, he will release his electrocution to your party 
doing big damage. Heal right away and repeat all the steps and you'll beat him 
eventually.
#############################################################################

After beating Nizbel, Azala will give you back your Gate Key. After receiving 
the key, you will automatically be taken back to Ayla's Hut. After saying 
goodbye, return to the Mystic Mountains.

MYSTIC MOUNTAINS (65,000,000 BC)
--------------------------------

In the mountains, all you have to do is to go all the way up until you see the 
Gate in the middle. So, stand to the edge of the cliff, right over the gate, 
and jump down. You'll automatically be brought again to the End of Time. Do 
what you usually do here and use pillar #6 to Medina Village 1000 AD. Then go 
to Melchior's Hut.

You can also beat Lavos right away using the bucket. You'll get ending #7 if 
you beat him.


